\title{Prediction of bike sharing demands using Random Forest and k-Nearest Neighbour}

\section{Introduction}
In many areas, rental bikes have been launched to improve accessibility ease. It is important to have the rented bike ready and open to the public at the appropriate time, as this reduces the amount of time people have to wait. Eventually, ensuring a steady supply of rented bikes for the area becomes a big concern. The most important aspect is predicting the number of rental bikes required at each hour in order to maintain a steady supply. This project discusses ways in which we can predict the number of bikes needed for the particular day based on the provided data set. These type of prediction systems enable users to borrow a bike from a specific location and return it to a different location. Hence, we use machine learning to predict the number of rental bikes that are needed on a particular day.

\section{Background}
Nowadays, more people are switching to riding bikes especially in city area due to traffic, health, or other subjective concerns. There are currently over 500 bike-sharing systems operating around the country, and over 500 thousand bicycles. Owing to their critical position in traffic, financial, and health problems, these networks are currently generating a lot of attention. The only problem lies within is providing the necessary number of bikes each day to almost every customer. In Machine Intelligence, there are many ways in which we can predict the number of bikes that might be needed in a particular day. The various data in the data collection were used to manipulate and forecast the final number of rental bikes. Methods such as Ridge Linear Regression, Support Vector Machine for Regression, Random Forest Method for Regression and Gradient Boosted Regression Tree are used for the prediction of rental bikes.    

\section{Data Information}
The obtained data set of this project consists of 17389 number of instances and 16 attributes where these values are either integers or real numbers. The data set attributes consists of current season  (winter, spring, summer and fall), date, weekday, holiday, weather information such as cloudy, rain, mist, number of users (casual and registered) and number of rental bikes. With the help of this dataset, the project predicts the number of rental bikes that might be needed based on the day. For example, the number of rental bikes on a heavy rain day might be much less than on a partial cloudy day. The total count is the sum of both casual users and registered users who rent the bike for that day. First the data was divided into into two parts: test and train. Both the data set is randomly divided where the test data is a little over a quarter of the entire data set and the remaining data set is for training. The split is achieved by randomly splitting the data set with a 70/30 and 80/20 split using predefined functions in scikit learn.

The project's data is divided into four models where the two main parts are casual users and regular users. Then the two divided models are again divided into two more parts which are working days and non working days. We used pandas and numpy libs for data processing. Below we have provided some graphs which were made with the help of matplotlib. These graphs show the importance of each data for every model. 

\
\section{Random Forest}
Random forest is a type of machine learning algorithm which is used to form a more powerful prediction model. After importing the necessary libraries for the code, the dataset was imported and prepared for training. Then, the data was scaled and the algorithm was trained. For training, the RandomForestRegressor class is used. This class solves regression problems, like ours, via random forest which is a collection of decision trees obtained by limitting the over fitting of data and aggregating one final result. 

\section{k-Nearest Neighbour}
The k-nearest neighbors (kNN) algorithm is a type of machine learning algorithms which is knows as a lazy learning algorithm since it doesn't have a specialized training phase. Rather, the output value of a new data point is calculated from the existing values (in our case, the number of bicycles) of its k-Nearest data point. It is robust to noisy training data and can work effectively with large training data. After importing the necessary libraries for our code, the dataset was imported and pre-processed by splitting it into attributes and label. k-Nearest Neighbour algorithm is very straight forwarded and easy and its implementation as well as the data prediction is done easily. We use KNeighborsClassifier class for the necessary prediction. Then we evaluate our algorithm and calculate the root mean square error.

\section{Performance Analysis}
Performance of any code means how precisely the program works and how accurately it can predict the output from the given dataset. In our initial dataset, we have a column called 'datetime' which has the necessary date and time in the same column. For the project, we have dropped the datetime column, after splitting the data into time and month. Then, we have also deleted the 'holiday' column because it was almost similar to 'workingday' column so we decided to avoid the correlation. Similarly, we have dropped 'atemp' column due to the same previous reason since it was correlated to column 'temp'. Data such as 'season' and 'weather' are highly correlated, so we applied 'One Hot Encoding'. By doing so, we are somewhat getting rid of the 'weather' column. Lastly, if any values were not present in the data, then we implemented Median Imputation, which would fill the empty box with the median of the whole data. After this, we start our algorithm with the remaining columns. 

\section{Comparing Performance}
In order to check the accuracy of our model, root mean square error is used to check the error value between the test values and the predicted ones. It is one of the best ways to find errors for projects like ours because it is a good measure for accurately predicting the response. 

Random Forest evaluated the prediction better than k-Nearest Neighbour in terms of performance as well as reliability. This is found out by comparing the difference between the errors from the two techniques. 

On the other hand, k-Nearest Neighbour is very inconsistent in giving the results in comparison Random Forest.

RMSLE for the whole data using Random Forest: 0.843

\section{Conclusion and Future Works}
In recent years, the popularity of bike demands has increased rapidly worldwide. The driving forces of such exponential development are the access, increased urbanisation, a need to reduce emissions and the need for agile, seamless mobility in urban environments. Hence, we created this project to get a better understanding of the number of bike demands based on the type of day. For this, we used Random Forrest and k-Nearest Neighbour to compare between Regression Model Generation for bike sharing demands. 
Prediction of bike sharing demand has starting to become more popular as the days pass by. This means there are lots of future possibilities for researchers in this topic. They can extend their research with the help of other algorithms such as using Feed Forward Neural Network Algorithm using multiple hidden layers. Another possibility is to predict the rate per user as addition to predicting the number of bikes per day. 


